Spring - Week 4
###############

:date: 2014-04-14
:summary: Design and initial testing of the Rube Goldberg devices
:category: lessons
:tags: rube goldberg, simple machines, energy, design 



**Notes are especially important this week!!  Make sure you record what you do and why every day!**

=====
Day 1
=====

**QWarmup:** If you put the pivot on one end of a lever that is 2 meters long,
and you lift up on the other end with a maximum force of 200 Newtons, what is
the largest mass you could lift if the mass is placed somewhere between you and
the pivot?


Today's job is to select at least 10 transitions that will occur in your Rube
Goldberg device and to draw sketches of how each element will work and how they
will connect in the transitions.  Whatever elements you want to have in your
device you should bring in by Tuesday, so you can spend your double block this
week in construction and testing.  If you will have a lever in your device, you
must calculate the relevant forces, angles, and distances, and show these
calculations in your notes.  If you will have a ramp, you will have to
calculate the relevant forces, angles, and distances.  If you will have a
chemical reaction, you will have to make some calculations of masses involved
in the reaction, temperatures reached, etc. (and talk to Mark about them before
you start mixing anything).  If you will have fire in your device, you must
show how it will be used, and discuss your safety plan.

For every project: **USE COMMON SENSE** and **CHECK WITH MARK BEFORE YOU DO
ANYTHING**.

The five basic energy forms to consider are electrical, mechanical, thermal,
chemical, and electromagnetic spectrum.  Within the category of mechanical you
can include each of the simple machines: lever, pulley, ramp, wheel and axle,
screw, and gear.  Your completed design should include a flowchart describing
the energy forms involved in each transfer and how they are realized in the
device.  You will receive points on your final device for each transfer, for
having a running time as close to two minutes as possible, and for completing
your final task without outside adjustment after the device begins operation.

Each day this week you will have some time to work on your device and some time
to work on problems or scenarios from me, which are intended to help you get
the background information you need to complete your design task.

Today, I'd like you to measure the energy you put into a match by striking it,
and the energy you get out of it by heating something.



=====
Day 2
=====

**QWarmup**:

An interesting example of a machine that used to be much more complicated.
Watch and explain the tradeoff that makes the gears in this device useful.


    .. youtube:: _8aH-M3PzM0
        :align: center


**Design Check-In** Each group must explain to Mark what task their device will
accomplish, at least three of the elements/subtasks that will occur to make
this happen, and demonstrate testing of at least one of these devices.


=====
Day 3
=====

**QWarmup**: Explain final task to rest of class.  For bonus points, coordinate with one other group to allow your final task to be their first task.

**BUILDING AND TESTING**:  Build and test one element at a time.  Your goal is to have reliable, safe operation that accomplishes each task correctly every time.  

**Check-in**: Explain difficulties to Mark and to one other group before end of class


=====
Day 4
=====

**Week 4 Quiz**

**Construction checkpoint**:  You should be halfway there -- all elements of your project should be decided on, at least half should be tested and working.  All materials should be present in the classroom by Monday the 21st.




========
Homework
========

Do your notes!

  

 
