Spring - Week 2
###############

:date: 2014-03-16
:summary: Figuring out the details on the potential energy curves of reactions and phase changes.  Starting to look at simple machines. 
:category: lessons
:tags: energy, simple machines, ramps, inclined plane, potential energy, temperature, phase change

====================================================
Day 1 and 2 - A misconception about potential energy
====================================================

**Q Warmup: If the temperature decreases during a chemical reaction, then the
potential energy curve for the reaction looks like:**

.. figure:: http://markbetnel.com/courses/labscience/images/reaction-PE-choices.jpg
   :scale: 25 %
   :alt: Reaction potential energy diagrams for warmup question 



Consider the following graph of potential energy vs. temperature for $H_2O$ molecules.

.. figure:: http://markbetnel.com/courses/labscience/images/phase-change-PE.jpg
   :scale: 25%
   :alt: Correct potential energy curve for phase changes of water


**Q1. How does the graph contradict what we said earlier about bond potential energies?**

**Q2. How does this graph match with what we have seen about the behavior of water?**

**Q3. How would this graph change if we add salt to the mix?**


When we started discussing phase changes and potential energy, we used a
metaphor for chemical bonds -- that a chemical bond is like a spring,
connecting two or more atoms together.  A spring makes sense because it allows
the pieces to move a bit, vibrating closer and farther apart, and you can
visualize that the strength of the bond has something to do with how tight the
spring is.  A tight spring means that the atoms are held tightly together, a
loose spring means they are held less tightly.  And we saw when we were playing
with springs last week that tight springs have more potential energy stored in
the spring for a given stretch amount than do loose springs.  

This metaphor made sense to understand some properties of molecules, but
unfortunately, it is misleading about some other properties.  Even more
unfortunately, I caused those misconceptions by not having thought clearly
through the consequences of using the spring picture to describe molecules.  

In a phase change from ice to liquid water, individual
molecules of $H_2O$ go  from having a strong network of connections to other
molecules that locks them in place (in ice) to having a much looser network of
connections that allows the molecules to move freely past each other.  The
molecules slow each other down as liquid (that's why water has its viscous
properties), but they don't stop each other completely.  If the attractions
between these molecules are represented as springs, and a loose spring has low
potential energy while a tight spring has high potential energy, it is natural
to say that the phase change from ice to liquid means that the molecules have
*decreased* in potential energy.

Here's the problem:  **How do you melt ice?**  You melt it by throwing energy
at it, until the molecules shake apart and begin to move freely as in a liquid.
But what form does that thrown energy have?  It is usually other molecules that
are moving faster than the molecules in the ice.  If they are moving faster,
they have higher kinetic energy, and if they have higher kinetic energy, than
when they collide, they *LOSE KINETIC ENERGY* giving it up to the molecules in
the ice.  This is why warm water will cool down when you put ice in it -- the
warm, high kinetic energy molecules of the liquid collide with the ice, and
bounce back off with less speed than they started with.

So think about that -- the liquid water is losing kinetic energy and getting
colder, meaning that the molecules in the ice must have *GAINED* energy (where
else could it go?).  But we already know, by doing the experiment, that
materials *do not change temperature during a phase change*.

Let that sink in -- *materials do not change temperature during a phase change*.

During the phase change, all the input energy is going into breaking and
rearranging the bonds and molecular attractions, and does NOT go into raising
the temperature.  That means that the *speed* of the molecules in the ice isn't
changing either (since that's what temperature measures), and so the *kinetic
energy* of the molecules in the ice is not changing.

Let that sink in -- *the kinetic energy of molecules in a material does not
change during a phase change*.

Let's put all that together:  you pour kinetic energy into a block of ice, the
ice melts, but the molecules do not move any faster.  So where is that energy
going?  It has to *increase something*.  The only option left is that it must
be increasing the *potential energy*.  

**Conclusion: the potential energy increases when you move from ice to liquid
water, and increases again when you move from liquid water to steam.**

That's a pretty complicated line of reasoning, and it would be natural to be a
little fuzzy on it at this point, so please, **Q: Rewrite this argument in your
own words in your notes.**  The key pieces are asking about where the energy
comes from to make ice melt, and where it must be going when we know that the
temperature doesn't change.


=======================
Day 3 - Simple Machines
=======================

**Q1. How can you lift something expending the least amount of effort?**

**Q2. What is the best way to quantify how much effort is involved in lifting that object?**

**Q3. How does the force change when you put the object on a ramp?  Easier?  Harder? Longer time? Shorter time?  Longer distance?  Shorter distance?**

**Q4.  Measure it.  Use the spring scales to find the force required to slide two different masses along ramps of varying  angles.  Use at least the angles of: 0, 30, 45, 60, and 90 degrees**

**Q5.  Graph the relation between input mass/force to just lift vs. force to slide. What do you notice?**

**Q6.  Is it easier on the ramp?  Why?**


=================================
Day 4 - Quiz and More with levers
=================================


========
Homework
========

Do your notes!


.. _yesterday: s-week-1-monday.html 
.. _tomorrow: s-week1-wednesday.html

   
