Week 1 Materials 
################

:date: 2014-12-01
:summary: Finishing up big data and setting the stage to study motion
:category: lessons
:tags: speed, position, displacement, data, graphing, slope, rates, linear fit, rain



=====
Day 1
=====

 1. Welcome back for Winter trimester.  Let's set up your notes for the week and get into new groups.  This trimester I will be less forgiving about late  and incomplete work -- the notes and summaries should be done each day and I expect them to be complete when I grade them the following week.  

 2. You can stop collecting rain data at this point -- if you have data that you haven't yet entered, please do so today.  We will be looking at that data sometime in the next week.

 3. Our goal for the winter trimester is to begin developing conceptual tools and methods in physics -- specifically we will be studying motion, forces, and energy.  SAAS has a 12th grade physics class that you should take in a few years to go into much greater depth on this material, but this trimester will be an introduction to those topics.

 4. Let's start getting some intuition about the relationship between motion, speed, velocity, and graphical representations of those quantitites by playing a game -- `The Graphing Game <http://theuniverseandmore.com/GraphGame.html>`_ Start just by playing with the first couple of levels -- the objective is to set the initial position and speed of the rolling fruit so that the graph of its subsequent motion matches the graph shown on the screen.

 5. After playing for a few minutes, open up the worksheet at the bottom of the game page, and begin answering the questions in that worksheet in your notes.  In addition to answering the questions, you should make graphs in Desmos that match the Position vs. Time graphs provided in the game.




=====
Day 2
=====

 1. I shared your winter trimester summary documents with you this morning, so I'd like to sart in the first few minutes by having you make sure you know where that document is, and that you have written your summary for yesterday in it.

 2. And now we're going to return to the Graphing Game from yesterday -- our goal is to finish the first 12 levels, but we have some specific tasks now for each level, to go along with the worksheet questions:

   a. Answer the worksheet questions for each level
   b. Make a Position vs. Time graph for each level
   c. Make a *Speed* vs. Time graph for each level -- this will require some thought
   d. Write instructions for each level that would allow you to solve it on the first try, without having to use trial and error -- basically develop a process that would tell you what to look for and what to calculate to be able to solve any of the levels without guessing or fiddling with the controls -- you would just calculate, enter the right values, and push Go.



=====
Day 3
=====

Double Block

 1. Finish levels 1 through 12 of the Graph Game, along with the worksheet questions and the graphs and instructions from yesterday.

 2. Today, add two more representations of the motion in these graphs:

   a. A table version of the graphs, showing position and time values as discrete points
   b. A table version of the speed graphs, showing the speed and time values as discrete points
   c. *Equations* that match the position vs.time graphs
   d. *Equations* that match the speed vs.time graphs

 3. Motion maps are yet another way of representing motion, in which multiple dots are shown for the position of the object at *fixed time intervals*  as though the picture were generated by using a flash camera that flashes every 1 second.  Make motion maps for Mark's motion through the room.

 4. Let's try to put all these representations next to each other on whiteboard and/or Desmos.

 5. write instructions you could follow to analyze *any* position vs. time graph to determine what the speed vs. time graph should be.

 6. Write instructions you could follow to analyze and speed vs. time graph to determine what the position vs.time graph should be.

 7. Are there formulas that can help us summarize this information?



=====
Day 4
=====

 1. `Quiz 1 <quiz-1-week-1.html>`_




   
